.. _data-structure:

================================================================================
Data Structure
================================================================================

This page describes the data structure of the OLD.  The OLD data structure is a
representation of the artifacts of linguistic fieldwork and their properties.
This data structure is implemented as tables and their inter-relations in a
relational database.  However, it is here presented using the language of
*model objects* and their *attributes*, i.e., using the conceptual structure of
the object-relational mapping provided by SQLAlchemy.

The prototypical OLD model object is the ``form``  which represents a linguistic
form, i.e., a morpheme, word, phrase or sentence elicited by a linguistic
fieldworker.  Some of the representative attributes of the form model are
``transcription``, ``morphemeBreak``, ``morphemeGloss``, ``translations``,
``grammaticality``, ``speaker`` and ``dateElicited``.

This exposition is structured according to the models defined by the OLD.\ [#f1]_
Each section begins with an overview of the model.  The attributes of the model
are described and justified in alphabetically ordered subsections.  Included in
these subsections are specifications of what constitutes a licit\ [#f4]_ value
for each attribute as well as the methods of construction for system-generated
values.  Each model section details the format of the input expected upon create
or update requests as well as the format of the model when returned.  Note that
all of the attributes of the objects in the input descriptions must be present.
In general, unspecified values should be represented as empty strings or JSON
``null``.  If the expected value is an array of ids of a given model, then
unspecified is indicated by an empty array (``[]``).  For example, the JSON
object used to create a form resource with no elicitor and no files associated
would (with other attributes omitted) look like
``{"elicitor": null, "files": []}``.

The ``id`` and ``datetimeModified`` attributes are common to all models and are
therefore described here in order to avoid repetition.  The former is the
integer value created by the RDBMS each time a new row is created in a table.
Each model has an ``id`` value that is unique among all other models of that
type.  The larger the ``id`` value the more recently added is the model.  The
``datetimeModified`` attribute holds a datetime value.  It is a UTC timestamp
generated by the application logic whenever a model is created or updated.
Datetime values are returned by OLD web services as strings in ISO 8601 format,
e.g., "2010-01-29T09:33:27".

A note on the terminology of *resources*, *controllers*, *models* and *tables*.
There is a near 1-to-1-to-1-to-1 correspondence between the *resources* exposed
by an OLD application, the *controllers* that facilitate interaction with them,
the *models* that enode their structure and the RDBMS *tables* where their data
are stored.  For example, form resources are accessed via the ``forms``
controller and the data for each form is represented internally as a ``form``
model object which is persisted to a ``form`` table in the database.  Some
resources, such as the ``rememberedforms`` quasi-resource described in
:ref:`interface`, have no corresponding model or table while some tables, e.g.,
the ``formtag`` table that stores the many-to-many relations between the
``form`` and ``tag`` tables, have no model or controller.  (Note that because
of a naming conflict, the controller responsible for OLD collections resources
is in ``controllers/oldcollections.py`` not ``controllers/collections.py``.)

Note finally that the OLD treats all strings as unicode.  Data input to the
database or written to disk are UTF-8 encoded.  The OLD applies unicode
canonical decomposition normalization [#f2]_ to all string data (including user
input, search query patterns and system-generated data).  This means that the
character "á" will be stored as "LATIN SMALL LETTER A" (U+0061) followed by the
combining character "COMBINING ACCUTE ACCENT" (U+0301) even when it is entered
as the canonically equivalent "LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH ACUTE" (U+00E1).  Such
normalization allows search and other functionality to work despite superficial
differences in user input.


.. _application-settings-data-structure:

``ApplicationSettings``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An application settings model stores system-wide application settings.  These
settings affect such things as how input is validated, what the morpheme
delimiters are, what the valid grammaticality values are, what the name of the
language being studied is, etc.

Requests to create or update application settings resources must contain a
JSON object of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "broadPhoneticInventory": "",
        "broadPhoneticValidation": "",
        "grammaticalities": "",
        "inputOrthography": null, // integer id of a valid orthography model, or null or "" if unspecified
        "metalanguageId": "",
        "metalanguageInventory": "",
        "metalanguageName": "",
        "morphemeBreakIsOrthographic": "",
        "morphemeBreakValidation": "",
        "morphemeDelimiters": "",
        "narrowPhoneticInventory": "",
        "narrowPhoneticValidation": "",
        "objectLanguageId": "",
        "objectLanguageName": "",
        "orthographicValidation": "",
        "outputOrthography": null, // integer id of a valid orthography model, or null or "" if unspecified
        "phonemicInventory": "",
        "punctuation": "",
        "storageOrthography": null, // integer id of a valid orthography model, or null or "" if unspecified
        "unrestrictedUsers": [] // array of ids of valid user models, or [] if none are unrestricted
    }

Application settings representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "broadPhoneticInventory": "",
        "broadPhoneticValidation": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "grammaticalities": "",
        "id": 1,
        "inputOrthography": {}, // object representation of an orthography model
        "metalanguageName": "",
        "metalanguageId": "",
        "metalanguageInventory": "",
        "morphemeBreakIsOrthographic": "",
        "morphemeBreakValidation": "",
        "morphemeDelimiters": "",
        "narrowPhoneticInventory": "",
        "narrowPhoneticValidation": "",
        "objectLanguageId": "",
        "objectLanguageName": "",
        "orthographicValidation": "",
        "outputOrthography": {}, // object representation of an orthography model
        "phonemicInventory": "",
        "punctuation": "",
        "storageOrthography": {}, // object representation of an orthography model
        "unrestrictedUsers": [] // array of objects representing user models
    }


``broadPhoneticInventory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``broadPhoneticInventory`` attribute is a comma-delimited
string representing the inventory of graphemes (i.e., single characters or
strings of characters) that should be used to construct broad phonetic
transcriptions, i.e., to construct values for the ``phoneticTranscription``
attribute of form models.  The space character should not be included as a
grapheme since the validation functionality will allow it by default.


``broadPhoneticValidation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``broadPhoneticValidation`` attribute determines how or whether the input to
the ``phoneticTranscription`` attribute of forms is validated.  The permissible
values of the ``broadPhoneticValidation`` attribute, as defined in the
``validationValues`` tuple of ``lib/utils.py``, are "Error", "Warning" and
"None".  If the value is "Error", then the OLD will not permit a form to be
created or updated if its ``phoneticTranscription`` value cannot be
constructed using the graphemes in the broad phonetic inventory plus the space
character.  See the :ref:`object-language-validation` section for more details.


``grammaticalities``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``grammaticalities`` attribute holds a comma-delimited list of
grammaticality values that will be the available options for the
``grammaticality`` attributes of form models and the ``grammaticality``
attributes of translation models.  The default value for this field is "\*,#,?" as
defined in the ``generateDefaultApplicationSettings`` function of
``lib/utils.py``.


``inputOrthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``inputOrthography`` is a reference to an existing orthography model object.
An orthography is essentially a list of graphemes (like an inventory) but with
some extra settings (cf. the :ref:`orthography-data-structure` section).  The
purpose of a system-wide input orthography is to allow for the possibility that
users will enter form transcriptions (and possibly also morpheme segmentations)
using one orthography (i.e., the input orthography) but that these
transcriptions will be translated into another orthography (i.e., the storage
orthography) for storage in the database.  When outputing the forms, the system
would then re-translate them from the storage orthography into the output
orthography.  Previous OLD applications implemented this orthography conversion
server-side.  However, with the new architecture of the OLD >= 1.0 this added
complication seems best implemented client-side as user-specific orthography
conversion.  Therefore, the ``inputOrthography`` attribute of the
``ApplicationSettings`` model may be removed in future versions of the OLD.


``metalanguageId``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``metalanguageId`` attribute is a three-character language Id
from the `ISO 639-3`_ standard which unambiguously identifies the metalanguage
of the application, i.e., the language used in the analysis and documentation of
the object language.  The OLD language resources contain the ISO 639-3 data;
that is, requesting ``GET /languages`` (or ``SEARCH /languages``,
``GET /applicationsettings/new`` or ``GET /applicationsettings/edit/id``) will
return a JSON array containing all of the languages identified in the ISO 639-3
standard.  The default value for the ``metalanguageId`` attribute is "eng".


``metalanguageInventory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``metalanguageInventory`` attribute is a comma-delimited
string representing the inventory of graphemes (i.e., single characters or
strings of characters) that should be used to construct the translations in the
``translations`` attribute of form models.  Note that the OLD is not set up to use
the inventory in the ``metalanguageInventory`` attribute for validation.


``metalanguageName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``metalanguageName`` is the name of the language that is used
in the analysis (and translation) of the language under study (the object
language).  The default value for this attribute is "English".


``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic`` attribute controls what
characters the system will expect to find in the values of the ``morphemeBreak``
attribute of forms.  If ``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic`` is set to "true" (or
"yes", "on" or "1"), then the system will expect the ``morphemeBreak`` value to
be constructed using the graphemes defined in the ``storageOrthography``
attribute; if it is set to "false" (or "no", "off" or "0"), the system will
expect graphemes from the ``phonemicInventory`` in the value of this attribute.


``morphemeBreakValidation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``morphemeBreakValidation`` attribute determines how or whether the input to
the ``morphemeBreak`` attribute of forms is validated.  The permissible values
of the ``morphemeBreakValidation`` attribute, as defined in the
``validationValues`` tuple of ``lib/utils.py``, are "Error", "Warning" and
"None".  If the value is "Error", then the OLD will not permit a form to be
created or updated if its ``morphemeBreak`` value cannot be constructed using
the graphemes of the relevant orthography/inventory (cf. the
``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic`` attribute) plus the space character.  See the
:ref:`object-language-validation` section for more details.


``morphemeDelimiters``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``morphemeDelimiters`` attribute holds a comma-delimited list of characters
that the system should expect users will employ when segmenting morpheme
transcriptions or morpheme glosses in the ``morphemeBreak`` and
``morphemeGloss`` fields, respectively.  The default value for this attribute,
as defined in the ``generateDefaultApplicationSettings`` function of
``lib/utils.py``, is "-,=".  If morpheme break validation is enabled, then these
delimiter characters will be permitted in the ``morphemeBreak`` values in
addition to the graphemes of the specified orthography/inventory.  See the
:ref:`object-language-validation` section for more details.


``narrowPhoneticInventory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``narrowPhoneticInventory`` attribute is a comma-delimited
string representing the inventory of graphemes (i.e., single characters or
strings of characters) that should be used to construct narrow phonetic
transcriptions, i.e., to construct values for the
``narrowPhoneticTranscription`` attribute of form models.  The space character
should not be included as a grapheme since the validation functionality will
allow it by default.


``narrowPhoneticValidation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``narrowPhoneticValidation`` attribute determines how or whether the input
to the ``narrowPhoneticTranscription`` attribute of forms is validated.  The
permissible values of the ``narrowPhoneticValidation`` attribute, as defined in
the ``validationValues`` tuple of ``lib/utils.py``, are "Error", "Warning" and
"None".  If the value is "Error", then the OLD will not permit a form to be
created or updated if its ``narrowPhoneticTranscription`` value cannot be
constructed using the graphemes in the narrow phonetic inventory plus the space
character.  See the :ref:`object-language-validation` section for more details.


``objectLanguageId``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``objectLanguageId`` attribute is a three-character language Id
from the `ISO 639-3`_ standard which unambiguously identifies the language being
documented using the application, i.e., the object language.  The OLD language
resources contain the ISO 639-3 data; that is, requesting ``GET /languages``
(or ``SEARCH /languages``, ``GET /applicationsettings/new`` or
``GET /applicationsettings/edit/id``) will return a JSON array containing all of
the languages identified in the ISO 639-3 standard.


``objectLanguageName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``objectLanguageName`` is the name of the language that is
being documented and analyzed using the OLD web service.


``orthographicValidation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``orthographicValidation`` attribute determines how or whether the input
to the ``transcription`` attribute of forms is validated.  The permissible
values of the ``orthographicValidation`` attribute, as defined in the
``validationValues`` tuple of ``lib/utils.py``, are "Error", "Warning" and
"None".  If the value is "Error", then the OLD will not permit a form to be
created or updated if its ``transcription`` value cannot be constructed using
the graphemes in the storage orthography plus the space character and the
specified punctuation.  See the :ref:`object-language-validation` section for
more details.


``outputOrthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``outputOrthography`` is a reference to an existing orthography model
object.  An orthography is essentially a list of graphemes (like an inventory)
but with some extra settings (cf. the :ref:`orthography-data-structure`
section).  The purpose of a system-wide output orthography is to allow for the
possibility that users will enter form transcriptions (and possibly also
morpheme segmentations) using one orthography (i.e., the input orthography) but
that these transcriptions will be translated into another orthography (i.e., the
storage orthography) for storage in the database.  When outputing the forms, the
system would then re-translate them from the storage orthography into the output
orthography.  Previous OLD applications implemented this orthography conversion
server-side.  However, with the new architecture of the OLD >= 1.0 this added
complication seems best implemented client-side as user-specific orthography
conversion.  Therefore, the ``outputOrthography`` attribute of the
``ApplicationSettings`` model may be removed in future versions of the OLD.


``phonemicInventory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``phonemicInventory`` attribute is a comma-delimited string
representing the inventory of phonemes that should be used to construct morpheme
segmentations in the ``morphemeBreak`` attribute of form resources.  See the
:ref:`object-language-validation` section for more details on configuring input
validation for the ``morphemeBreak`` attribute of forms.


``punctuation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``punctuation`` attribute holds a string representing a list of punctuation
characters.  There is no delimiter: each character in the string is considered
a punctuation character.  Thus the default value of ``.,;:!?'"‘’“”[]{}()-``
results in the following characters being identified as valid punctuation:
FULL STOP, COMMA, SEMICOLON, COLON, EXCLAMATION MARK, QUESTION MARK, APOSTROPHE,
QUOTATION MARK, LEFT SINGLE QUOTATION MARK, RIGHT SINGLE QUOTATION MARK,
LEFT DOUBLE QUOTATION MARK, RIGHT DOUBLE QUOTATION MARK, LEFT SQUARE BRACKET,
RIGHT SQUARE BRACKET, LEFT CURLY BRACKET, RIGHT CURLY BRACKET, LEFT PARENTHESIS,
RIGHT PARENTHESIS, HYPHEN-MINUS.  When orthographic validation is enabled, the
system will allow the punctuation characters specified here to occur in the
values of the ``transcription`` attribute of forms.


``storageOrthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``storageOrthography`` is a reference to an existing orthography model
object.  An orthography is essentially a list of graphemes (like an inventory)
but with some extra settings (cf. the :ref:`orthography-data-structure` section).
The storage orthography defines the character sequences that should be used to
create form ``transcription`` values.  If the ``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic``
attribute is set to "true", then the form ``morphemeBreak`` values should also
be constructed out of the graphemes defined in the ``storageOrthography`` (plus
the morpheme delimiters specified in ``morphemeDelimiters``).  See the
:ref:`object-language-validation` section for details on how to configure
orthography/inventory-based validation for form transcription attributes.

The system-wide storage orthography is also a component in an orthography
conversion feature.  Orthography conversion allows for the possibility that
users will enter form transcriptions (and possibly also morpheme segmentations)
using one orthography (i.e., the input orthography) but that these
transcriptions will be translated into another orthography (i.e., the storage
orthography) for storage in the database.  When outputing the forms, the system
would then re-translate them from the storage orthography into the output
orthography.  Previous OLD applications implemented this orthography conversion
server-side.  However, with the new architecture of the OLD >= 1.0 this added
complication seems best implemented client-side as user-specific orthography
conversion.


``unrestrictedUsers``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``unrestrictedUsers`` attribute is a collection of user models which
identifies the set of users that are to be identified as *unrestricted*.  Such
users are authorized to access restricted form, file and collection resources
while contributors and viewers who are not unrestricted (i.e., who are
*restricted*) are unable to view (or, *a fortiori*, update) such resources.  See
the :ref:`auth` section for more details on authorization based on the
"restricted" classification.


.. _collection-data-structure:

``Collection``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OLD collection models are documents that can contain both text (with markup) and
references to form models in their ``contents`` attribute.  They can be used for
a number of purposes: to create a simple list of forms, to write an academic
paper or a lesson plan, to document a conversation or narrative, etc.  The value
of the ``contents`` attribute is a document written using one of the lightweight
markup languages `reStructuredText`_ or `Markdown`_.  OLD collections can embed
other OLD collections via reference.  As reStructuredText or MarkDown documents,
they can be converted to HTML and, in the case of collections written using
reStructuredText, they can be converted to (Xe)LaTeX (whence to PDF) and Open
Document Format (i.e., .odt; whence to Word, i.e., .doc).

Collection creation and update requests must contain a JSON object of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "contents": "",
        "dateElicited": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // valid user model id or null
        "files": [] // array of valid file model ids or []
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "source": null, // valid source model id or null
        "speaker": null, // valid speaker model id or null
        "tags": [], // array of valid tag model ids or []
        "title": "My Collection",
        "type": "",
        "url": "",
    }

Collection representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "contents": "",
        "contentsUnpacked": "",
        "dateElicited": "",
        "datetimeEntered": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // an object representation of a user or null
        "enterer": { ... }, // an object representation of a user
        "files": [], // an array of object representations of files or []
        "forms": [], // an array of object representations of forms or []
        "html": "",
        "id": 1,
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "source": null, // an object representation of a source or null
        "speaker": null, // an object representation of a speaker or null
        "tags": [], // an array of object representations of tags or []
        "title": "",
        "type": "",
        "url": "",
        "UUID": ""
    }


.. _collection-contents:

``contents``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``contents`` attribute is a string that constitutes the content
of the collection.  If markup is used, it should be the markup specified in the
``markupLanguage`` attribute.

The value of this attribute can contain references to form models in the
database.  These references are strings like ``form[136]`` or ``Form[136]``,
i.e., the string "form" or "Form", followed by a left bracket "\[", followed by
a valid form model id, followed by a right bracket "\]".  The reference
"form[136]" would result in the form with id 136 being associated to the
collection, i.e., ``collection.forms`` would contain that form.

Note that the value of the ``contents`` attribute need not contain any markup
or other text.  That is, it may simply be a string consisting of references to
forms.

Here is an example of a well-formed ``contents`` value that uses the MarkDown
markup language and contains a reference to the form with id 136::

    Chapter 2
    =========
    
    Section containing a list
    -------------------------
    
    * Item 1
    * Item 2
    
    Section containing forms
    ------------------------
    
    form[136]

It is also possible to reference another collection within the value of the
``contents`` attribute.  This causes the contents of first collection to behave
as though it contained the contents of the referenced collection in its contents
value at the point of reference.  For example, consider collection *C2* below
which references collection *C1* (with id 3) from above. ::

    Chapter 1
    =========
    
    Section containing prose
    ------------------------
    
    Blah blah pied piping ... blah blah.
    
    Section containing forms
    ------------------------
    
    form[135]
    
    collection[3]

When collection *C2* is created, the ``collections`` controller will generate
the following value for ``contentsUnpacked``::

    Chapter 1
    =========
    
    Section containing prose
    ------------------------
    
    Blah blah pied piping ... blah blah.
    
    Section containing forms
    ------------------------
    
    form[135]
    
    Chapter 2
    =========
    
    Section containing a list
    -------------------------
    
    * Item 1
    * Item 2
    
    Section containing forms
    ------------------------
    
    form[136]

The above ``contentsUnpacked`` value will be used to extract the form references
of the collection and to generate the value of the ``html`` attribute.  That is,
collection *C2* will be associated to forms 135 and 136.  Note that
collection-collection references can be nested, i.e., collections can reference
collections which reference other collections, etc.


``contentsUnpacked``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``contentsUnpacked`` attribute is the value of the ``contents``
attribute when all of its collection references are replaced with the contents
of the collections referred to.  These referred-to collections can refer to
others in turn and all such references are replaced by the appropriate
``contents`` values.  The form models associated to a collection are calculated
by gathering all of the form references in the value of the ``contentsUnpacked``
attribute.

A result of collection-to-collection referencing is that the ``contents`` and
``forms`` values of a collection may be altered by updates to other collections.
The forms controller handles this by calling
``updateCollectionsThatReferenceThisCollection`` upon successful update
requests.


``dateElicited``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``dateElicited`` attribute is a user-supplied date value which indicates the
date when the collection was elicited.  The date must be in mm/dd/yyyy format.
This is applicable to collections that represent records of events, e.g.,
elicitation sessions, recordings of stories, etc.


``datetimeEntered``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``datetimeEntered`` attribute is a UTC timestamp generated by
the system when a collection is created.  Note that this value is distinct from
the ``datetimeModified`` attribute that is common to all model types since that
value is generated upon creation *and* update requests while the
``datetimeEntered`` value is only generated upon creation requests and is not
altered thereafter.


``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute is a user-supplied string that
describes the collection.


``elicitor``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``elicitor`` attribute references a valid user model who is the elicitor of
the collection.  This attribute may not be appropriate for all collection types.


``enterer``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``enterer`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
create the collection.  This value is generated automatically by the system upon
collection creation.


``files``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A collection may be associated to zero or more files via the ``files`` attribute
which references a collection [#f5]_ of file models.  Files are OLD objects that
represent a binary file (e.g., an audio, video or image file) along with
metadata.  An example use case would be a collection that represents an
elicitation session and which is associated to one or more files whose file data
are large audio recordings of the session.  See the :ref:`file-data-structure`
section for details on the structure of file models.


``forms``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A collection may be associated to zero or more forms.  These are stored in the
``forms`` attribute, which references a collection of form models.  Whereas
files are associated to an OLD collection by specifying an array of file ids
in the ``files`` attribute of the JSON object passed to collection create/update
requests, forms are associated indirectly, that is by being referenced in the
value of the ``contents`` attribute of the collection (cf. the
:ref:`collection-contents` section).


``html``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``html`` attribute is a string of HTML that is generated by the
system using the value of the ``contentsUnpacked`` attribute and the
markup-to-HTML function corresponding to the markup language specified in the
``markupLanguage`` attribute.  Note that while the HTML could be generated in
the user-facing application, there is not, to my knowledge, a JavaScript
implementation of the reStructuredText markup-to-HTML algorithm; therefore the
HTML generation is performed server-side.  Note also that form references are
left as-is, which is to say that no HTML representation of the form data is
generated.  This is left as a task for the user-facing application since
applications will have their own method(s) of displaying forms.


``markupLanguage``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``markupLanguage`` attribute is one of "Markdown" or
"reStructuredText" as defined in the ``markupLanguages`` variable of
``lib/utils.py``.  `Markdown`_ and `reStructuredText`_ are *lightweight markup
languages*.  A lightweight markup language is a markup language (i.e., a system
for annotating a document) that is designed to be easy to read in its raw form.
If no value is specified, "reStructuredText" will be the default.


``source``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``source`` attribute references a valid source model that indicates the
textual (or other) source of the collection.  This is useful for when the
content of a collection is taken from another document and that fact needs to be
attributed.  The structure of the source model is based on the BibTeX format.
See the :ref:`source-data-structure` section for details.


``speaker``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``speaker`` attribute references a valid speaker model who is the speaker or
consultant of the collection.  As with attributes like ``elicitor``, the
``speaker`` attribute may not be appropriate for all collection types.


``tags``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A collection may be associated to zero or more tags and these associations are
stored in the ``tags`` attribute.  Tags are user-defined models that can be used
to arbitrarily categorize other OLD models.  If a collection is to be
restricted, the special "restricted" tag should be associated to it.  See the
:ref:`tag-data-structure` section for details.


``title``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``title`` attribute is a string that is the title of the
collection.  All collections must have a title and no title may exceed 255
characters.


``type``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``type`` attribute is used to classify the collection and may
affect how it is displayed or exported.  The permitted values, as defined in
``collectionTypes`` in ``lib/utils.py``, are "story", "elicitation", "paper",
"discourse" and "other".  If no value is specified, ``null`` is the default.


``url``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``url`` attribute is not actually a valid URL but something
more akin to the *path* component of a URL.  That is, it is a string composed of
any of the 26 letters of the English alphabet (including uppercase versions),
the underscore "_", the forward slash "/" and the hyphen "-".  The ``url`` value
must not exceed 255 characters.  At present the OLD qua web service does not
make use of this attribute.  However, it may be used by a user-facing
application to allow users to navigate to a specific collection using something
more meaningful than an integer id.  For example, on a web application front-end
to an OLD web service with the URL ``http://www.xyz-old.org``, one might
navigate to a representation of the collection entitled "Magnum Opus" by
entering ``http://www.xyz-old.org/magnum_opus`` in the address bar (where
"magnum_opus" is the value of the ``url`` attribute.)


``UUID``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``UUID`` attribute is a universally unique identifier (UUID),
i.e., a number represented by 32 hexadecimal digits displayed in five groups
using four hyphens.  A valid UUID is a 36-character string that looks like
``aba3ea8d-b56f-4934-a8f7-68cba500f411``.  The collections controller (i.e,
``oldcollections``) randomly generates a UUID value for each newly created
collection model.  These values are used to associate collection backups to the
collections they backup.


.. _collection-backup-data-structure:

``CollectionBackup``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A collection backup model is created whenever a collection model is updated or
deleted.  These models cannot be created directly, i.e.,
``POST /collectionbackups`` is not a valid request.  The collection backup model
receives all of the attributes of the model that it backs up.  It also has some
additional attributes, viz. ``collection_id`` and ``backuper``.  The value of
the ``collection_id`` attribute is the value of the ``id`` attribute of the
collection that was backed up to create the present collection backup model.
The value of the ``backuper`` attribute is a JSON object representing the user
who created the backup (by deleting or updating the collection).  In general,
the values of the relational attributes of the collection (i.e., the attributes
that refer to other models) are converted to JSON object representations in the
collection backup model.  For example, the value of the ``speaker`` attribute is
such a JSON object and the value of the ``files`` attribute is a JSON array of
such objects representing file models.  Since form models have many attributes
and since collection models will, typically, be associated to many form models,
the ``forms`` attribute of a collection backup model is simply a JSON array of
form ``id`` values.  If the collection has just been deleted, then the value of
the ``datetimeModified`` value of the collection backup will be the UTC
datetime at the time of deletion.

Collection backup representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "backuper": { ... } // an object representation of a user
        "collection_id": 1
        "contents": "",
        "contentsUnpacked": "",
        "dateElicited": "",
        "datetimeEntered": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // an object representation of a user or null
        "enterer": { ... }, // an object representation of a user
        "files": [], // an array of object representations of files
        "forms": [], // an array of object representations of forms
        "html": "",
        "id": 1,
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "source": null, // an object representation of a source or null
        "speaker": null, // an object representation of a speaker or null
        "tags": [], // an array of object representations of tags
        "title": "",
        "type": "",
        "url": "",
        "UUID": ""
    }


.. _elicitation-method-data-structure:

``ElicitationMethod``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Elicitation method objects represent a set of tags for categorizing the way in
which a form was elicited.  For example, sometimes a researcher asks a
consultant "How do you say 'Every man loves a woman.'?"  An elicitation method
used to categorize forms elicited in this way might have a ``name`` value of
"translated English".  Sometimes a researcher asks a consultant "Does this sound
like a good sentence: 'Il y a une femme que tous les hommes aiment.'?"  The
elicitation method for such forms might have a name of "judged object language
utterance of researcher".

Elicitation method creation and update requests must contain a JSON object of
the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "description": "",
        "name": ""
    }

Elicitation method representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "id": 1,
        "name": ""
    }

``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute is a user-supplied string that
describes the elicitation method and (perhaps) provides guidance on its use.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``name`` attribute is an obligatory, user-supplied string of
no more than 255 characters which must be unique among all other elicitation
method names.


.. _file-data-structure:

``File``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OLD file model objects are binary files with metadata.  From the language
researcher's point of view, they are the audio/video recordings of linguistic
fieldwork as well as image, audio or video files that may be used to elicit
speech or even the documents (such as PDFs of handouts or pedagogical materials)
that are in some way related to language data.

There are three types of file models and while each share a common core of
metadata-related attributes, they have attributes unique to their type as well.
*Local* files are stored on the filesystem (by default, in the ``files/``
directory) of the machine serving an OLD applicaton.  *Subinterval-referencing*
files get their file content from a local audio/video file (their
``parentFile``) and have ``start`` and ``end`` attributes which reference start
and end positions in the parent file.  *Externally hosted* files have content
stored on another server and have ``url`` attributes for locating that content.
The form of the input passed with create requests will determine which type of
file model is created. Whatever the type of file being created, the URL and HTTP
method for such requests remains the same, i.e., ``POST /files``.

When creating a *local* OLD file, it is necessary to upload a binary file to the
OLD.\ [#f6]_  The traditional way of doing this in web applications is to
specify the ``Content-Type`` of the HTTP request as ``multipart/form-data`` and
pass the binary file data in the body of the request in a special format.  When
using this method, additional parameters are restricted to simple name-value
pairs -- hierarchical JSON objects are not permitted.  Therefore, when one is
using the ``multipart/form-data`` approach and when the file ought to be
associated to multiple tag or form models, the parameter names should make use
of the following convention: <attribute_name>-<index>.  That is, to associate
the tags with ``id`` values 2 and 36 to a file one is creating, the body of the
request should contain a parameter named "tags-0" with a value of "2" and
another parameter named "tags-1" with a value of "36".  Similarly, associating
a new file to multiple forms using the ``multipart/form-data`` approach will
require parameter names like "forms-0", "forms-1", "forms-2", etc.  When using
this approach, at least the following set of parameters must be included.

+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| Parameter name | Comments                                                  |
+================+===========================================================+
| filename       | required                                                  |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| dateElicited   | format mm/dd/yyyy                                         |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| description    | possibly empty string describing the file                 |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| elicitor       | id of a valid elicitor model, or empty string             |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| forms-0        | id of a valid form model, or empty string                 |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| speaker        | id of a valid speaker model, or empty string              |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| tags-0         | id of a valid tag model, or empty string                  |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| utteranceType  | one of the allowed utterance types                        |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+

The other way of creating a local OLD file is to set the ``Content-Type`` of the
request to ``application/json`` and send all input as a JSON object, as is done
with all other creation and update requests to an OLD web service.  Under this
approach, the binary file is converted to a string using
`Base64 encoding <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64>`_ and that string is the
value of the ``base64EncodedFile`` attribute of the JSON object passed in the
request body.  Because it is inefficient to Base64-encode large files on the
client and then decode them in memory on the server, requests to ``POST /files``
with a request body that is greater than 20MB [#f3]_ will be rejected with a 400
error code.  File creation requests for *local* files using the
``application/json`` content type must contain a JSON object of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "base64EncodedFile": ""
        "dateElicited": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // valid user model id or null
        "filename": "",
        "forms": [], // array of valid form model ids or []
        "speaker": null, // valid speaker model id or null
        "tags": [], // array of valid tag model ids or []
        "utteranceType": "",
    }

Note that once a local file model has been created the value of its ``filename``
attribute cannot be changed, nor can its file data.  That is, requests to
``PUT /files`` should contain an object just like that presented above except
that the ``base64EncodedFile`` and ``filename`` attributes ought to be removed
as they will simply be ignored by the controller handling the request.  In
contrast, when requesting an update to an externally hosted or
subinterval-referencing file, the input object may contain new values for all of
the attributes permitted on create requests (see below).

Requests to create subinterval-referencing files are identified by the presence
of a ``parentFile`` attribute in the request parameters.  Creation requests for
these types of files must contain a JSON object in the body of the request of
the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "dateElicited": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // valid user model id or null
        "end": 4.7, // integer or float representing the end of the interval in seconds
        "filename": "",
        "forms": [], // array of valid form model ids or []
        "name": "",
        "parentFile": 1, // valid id of a local OLD audio/video file
        "speaker": null, // valid speaker model id or null
        "start": 3.5, // integer or float representing the start of the interval in seconds
        "tags": [], // array of valid tag model ids or []
        "utteranceType": "",
    }

Requests to create externally hosted files are identified by the presence of a
``url`` attribute in the request parameters.  Creation requests for these types
of files must contain a JSON object in the body of the request of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "dateElicited": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // valid user model id or null
        "filename": "",
        "forms": [], // array of valid form model ids or []
        "MIMEtype": "",
        "name": "",
        "parentFile": 1, // valid id of a local OLD file
        "password": "",
        "speaker": null, // valid speaker model id or null
        "tags": [], // array of valid tag model ids or []
        "url": "http://vimeo.com/13452",
        "utteranceType": "",
    }

File representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "dateElicited": "",
        "datetimeEntered": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "elicitor": null, // integer id of a valid user model
        "end": null, // number or null
        "enterer": 1, // integer id of a valid user model
        "filename": "",
        "forms": [], // array of valid ids of form models
        "id": 1,
        "lossyFilename": "",
        "MIMEtype": "",
        "name": "",
        "parentFile": null,  // integer id of a valid (audio/video) file model
        "password": "",
        "size": null, // integer representing the size of the file in bytes
        "speaker": null, // integer id of a valid speaker model
        "start": null, // number or null
        "tags": [], // array of valid ids of tag models
        "url": "",
        "utteranceType": ""
    }



``dateElicited``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``dateElicited`` attribute is a user-supplied date value which indicates the
date when the file was elicited, if applicable, e.g., when a recording of an
elicitation was made.  The date must be in mm/dd/yyyy format.


``datetimeEntered``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``datetimeEntered`` attribute is a UTC timestamp generated by
the system when a file is created.  Note that this value is distinct from the
``datetimeModified`` attribute that is common to all model types since that
value is generated upon creation *and* update requests while the
``datetimeEntered`` value is only generated upon creation requests and is not
altered thereafter.


``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute is a user-supplied string that
describes the file.


``elicitor``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``elicitor`` attribute references a valid user model who is the elicitor of
the file, if applicable.


``end``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``end`` attribute is a number (integer or float) representing
the end of the subinterval in seconds of a subinterval-referencing file.  For
example, consider the subinterval-referencing file *F2* which references the
audio file *F1* as its parent file.  A value of 3.7 for the ``end`` attribute of
*F1* means that the content of *F1* is a portion of the audio file of *F2* which
ends at 3.7 seconds.  Note that only subinterval-referencing files should have
values for the ``end`` attribute.


``enterer``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``enterer`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
create the file.  This value is generated automatically by the system upon file
creation.


``filename``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``filename`` attribute holds the name of the file as it is stored in the
filesystem.  When a local file is created, a non-empty ``filename`` value must
be provided in the input parameters.  While unicode (i.e., non-ASCII) characters
are permitted in the ``filename`` value, the system removes certain characters
(QUOTATION MARK ("), APOSTROPHE ('), the path separator (/ on Unix systems) and
the null byte) and replaces spaces with underscores.  If a file with the
resulting name already exists in the directory that holds local file data (the
``files/`` directory by default), then the system will alter the name (by
inserting an underscore followed by a string of eight random characters between
the end of the file name and its extension) until a unique one is found.  The
resulting string becomes the value of the ``filename`` attribute.  So, for
example, if a file create request contains "john's file.wav" as the value of the
``filename`` parameter and if ``files/johns_file.wav`` already exists, then the
file data will be saved to something like ``files/johns_file_3Df6Nop0.wav`` and
the value of the ``filename`` attribute of the file model will be
"johns_file_3Df6Nop0.wav".


``forms``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A file model may be associated to zero or more forms.  On file create and update
requests, associated forms are specified by providing an array of valid form ids
as the value of the ``forms`` attribute.  When JSON object representations of
file models are returned, the value of the ``forms`` attribute is an array of
JSON objects representing the associated forms.


``lossyFilename``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the OLD is configured to create reduced-size copies of uploaded files and if
the requisite dependencies are installed (i.e., PIL or FFmpeg), then the system
will create reduced-size (i.e., lossy) copies of the files in
``files/reduced_files/`` and the ``lossyFilename`` attribute will return the
name of the reduced-size copy in that directory.  For example, if in the config
file ``create_reduced_size_file_copies`` is set to "1" and
``preferred_lossy_audio_format`` is set to "ogg" and if FFmpeg is installed,
then a WAV file uploaded and saved to ``files/my_file.wav`` will have a lossy
copy in ``files/reduced_files/my_file.ogg`` and the value of ``lossyFilename``
will be "my_file.ogg".


``MIMEtype``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

MIMEtypes, also known as Internet Media Types, are standardized strings used to
categorize types of binary files.  An OLD web service will ascertain the
MIMEtype of an uploaded file using the python-magic module and the contents of
the file.  If the MIMEtype is in the list of allowed MIMEtypes (as defined in
``allowedFileTypes`` of ``lib/utils.py``), then the value of the ``MIMEtype``
attribute will be assigned to the ascertained MIMEtype string.  The valid
MIME/Internet Media types are listed in the table below.

+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Internet media type | Common extension(s) | Name                                    |
+=====================+=====================+=========================================+
| application/pdf     | .pdf                | Portable Document Format                |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| image/gif           | .gif                | GIF image                               |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| image/jpeg          | .jpg, jpeg          | JPEG JFIF image                         |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| image/png           | .png                | Portable Network Graphics               |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| audio/mpeg          | .mp3                | MP3 or other MPEG audio                 |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| audio/ogg           | .ogg                | Ogg Vorbis, Speex, Flac and other audio |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| audio/x-wav         | .wav, .wave         | WAV audio                               |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| video/mpeg          | .mpeg               | MPEG-1 video with multiplexed audio     |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| video/mp4           | .mp4                | MP4 video                               |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| video/ogg           | .ogg, .ogv          | Ogg Theora or other video (with audio)  |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| video/quicktime     | .mov, .qt           | QuickTime video                         |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| video/x-ms-wmv      | .wmv                | Windows Media Video                     |
+---------------------+---------------------+-----------------------------------------+


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Externally hosted and subinterval-referencing files may supply a value for the
``name`` attribute.  Since these types of files do not have values for the
``filename`` attribute, the ``name`` attribute can be useful in identifying
them.  For local files the system automatically sets the ``name`` attribute to
the value of the ``filename`` attribute.  If a subinterval-referencing file
creation request does not include a non-empty ``name`` value, then the value
assigned to that attribute is the value of the ``filename`` attribute of the
subinterval-referencing file's parent file.


``parentFile``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Subinterval-referencing files are identified by possession of a non-empty
``parentFile`` attribute.  The value of this attribute is a reference to an
existing local file.  The parent file must be an audio or video file.  The
subinterval-referencing file gets its file data from its parent file.


``password``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``password`` attribute can be specified for externally hosted file models
that require a password in order for the external host to serve the file.  Note
that this value will be available to all users of the system and should *not*
therefore be a password used for other purposes, e.g., to log in to the OLD web
service itself.


``size``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Local file models have a value for the ``size`` attribute which is an integer
representing the size of the binary file in bytes.  This is calculated upon a
successful file creation request.


``speaker``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``speaker`` attribute references a valid speaker model who is the speaker or
consultant of the file.  This is appropriate in cases where the file is, say,
an audio recording of a speaker telling a story or a recording of an
elicitation session with a particular consultant.


``start``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``start`` attribute is a number (integer or float) representing
the beginning of the subinterval in seconds of a subinterval-referencing file.
For example, consider the subinterval-referencing file *F2* which references the
audio file *F1* as its parent file.  A value of 2.1 for the ``start`` attribute
of *F1* means that the content of *F1* is a portion of the audio file of *F2*
begins at 2.1 seconds.  Note that only subinterval-referencing files should have
values for the ``start`` attribute.


``tags``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A file may be associated to zero or more tags.  Tags are user-defined models
that can be used to arbitrarily categorize other OLD models.  If a file is to be
restricted, then the special "restricted" tag should be associated to id.  See
the :ref:`tag-data-structure` section for more details on the tag model.


``url``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Externally hosted files are identified by possession of a non-empty value for
the ``url`` attribute.  The value should be a valid URL that will serve the
content of the file when requested.  This value will allow user-facing
applications to display (i.e., embed) the file content of externally hosted
file models.


``utteranceType``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Files that represent recordings of utterances should be categorized using the
``utteranceType`` attribute.  Valid values, as defined in the ``utteranceTypes``
tuple of ``lib/utils.py`` are "None", "Object Language Utterance", "Metalanguage
Utterance" and "Mixed Utterance".  If the value of this attribute on input is an
empty string or ``null``, then its value will be ``null``.

Here is a potential use case scenario for this attribute.  Consider an OLD web
service that is being used to study the Blackfoot language and imagine a file
model *F1* whose binary data is a WAV file audio recording of a speaker saying
"oki", which means "hello" in Blackfoot.  Now imagine a second file, *F2* whose
binary data is another WAV file recording of the speaker saying "hello".  Assume
that the ``utteranceType`` value of *F1* is "Object Language Utterance" (since
it is a recording of an utterance of the object language, i.e., Blackfoot) and
assume that the ``utteranceType`` value of *F2* is "Metalanguage Utterance"
(since it is a recording of an utterance in the language of analysis and
translation, i.e., English).  Now imagine a form *F* whose transcription is
"oki" and whose only translation is "hello" and which is associated to files
*F1* and *F2*.  If there are a good number of forms like *F*, then an
application making use of this OLD web service would be able to reasonably
assume that *F1*, being an object language utterance associated to *F* is a
recording of a speaker uttering the linguistic form that is transcribed in *F*.
Such an application could then use such forms to automatically generate
audio/textual language learning games or talking dictionaries.


.. _form-data-structure:

``Form``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An OLD form model represents a linguistic form in a very general sense; that is,
it can represent a lexical item abstracted from any elicitation or recording
event as well as a word, phrase or sentence uttered on a particular occasion
by a particular speaker.

Form creation and update requests must contain a JSON object of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "comments": "",
        "dateElicited": "" // string of the form mm/dd/yyyy
        "elicitationMethod": null, // valid elicitation method model id or null
        "elicitor": null, // valid user model id or null
        "files": [], // array of valid file model ids or []
        "translations": [{"transcription": "hello", "grammaticality": ""}],
        "grammaticality": "",
        "morphemeBreak": "",
        "morphemeGloss": "",
        "narrowPhoneticTranscription": "",
        "phoneticTranscription": "",
        "source": null, // valid source model id or null
        "speaker": null, // valid speaker model id or null
        "speakerComments": "",
        "status": "",
        "syntacticCategory": null, // valid syntactic category model id or null
        "tags": [], // array of valid tag model ids or []
        "transcription": "oki",
        "verifier": null // valid user model id or null
    }

Forms representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "breakGlossCategory": "",
        "comments": "",
        "dateElicited": "",
        "datetimeEntered": "", // system-generated ISO 8601-formatted datetime
        "datetimeModified": "", // system-generated ISO 8601-formatted datetime
        "elicitationMethod": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "elicitor": null, // an object representation of a user or null
        "enterer": { ... }, // an object representation of a user
        "files": [], // an array of object representations of files or []
        "translations": [{...}], // an array of object representations of translations
        "grammaticality": "",
        "id": 1, // the integer id assigned by the database
        "morphemeBreak": "",
        "morphemeBreakIDs": null, // an array or null
        "morphemeGloss": "",
        "morphemeGlossIDs": null, // an array or null
        "narrowPhoneticTranscription": "",
        "phoneticTranscription": "",
        "source": null, // an object representation of a source or null
        "speakerComments": "",
        "speaker": null, // an object representation of a speaker or null
        "status": "",
        "syntacticCategory": null, // an object representation of a syntactic category or null
        "syntacticCategoryString": "",
        "tags": [], // an array of object representations of tags or []
        "transcription": "bonjour",
        "UUID": "1025b514-5781-4dce-8715-8c2590119546", // generated by the system
        "verifier": null, // an object representation of a user or null
    }

``breakGlossCategory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``breakGlossCategory`` attribute stores a system-generated string which
merges the values of the ``morphemeBreak``, ``morphemeGloss`` and
``syntacticCategoryString`` attributes.  For example, the ``breakGlossCategory``
value of a form with "chien-s" as its morpheme segmentation, "dog-PL" as its
morpheme gloss string and "N-Num" as its syntactic category would be
"chien|dog|N-s|PL|Num".  Since the ``breakGlossCategory`` value is searchable,
it can be used to filter forms according to presence/absence of a specific
morpheme.  See the :ref:`morphological-processing` section for details on the
structure of this value and its method of generation.


``collections``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A form may be associated to zero or more collections.  Collections are documents
that typically reference, and are associated to, multiple forms.  Note
that such associations are *not* created during form creation or updating but
during collection creation.  See the :ref:`collection-data-structure` section
for details.


``comments``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``comments`` attribute is an open-ended field that may contain any comments
about the form or any data that do not fit neatly into the standard attributes
of the form resource.  If multiple forms are to be tagged or classified in some
way, it is better to use the ``tags`` attribute for this purpose and not the
``comments`` attribute.


``dateElicited``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``dateElicited`` attribute is a user-supplied date value which indicates the
date when the form was elicited.  The date must be in mm/dd/yyyy format.  For
abstract lexical forms this value may not be appropriate.


``datetimeEntered``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``datetimeEntered`` attribute is a UTC timestamp generated by
the system when a form is created.  Note that this value is distinct from the
``datetimeModified`` attribute that is common to all model types since that
value is generated upon creation *and* update requests while the
``datetimeEntered`` value is only generated upon creation requests and is not
altered thereafter.


``elicitationMethod``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``elicitationMethod`` attribute references a valid elicitation method model
that classifies the way in which the form was elicited.  See the
:ref:`elicitation-method-data-structure` section for details.


``elicitor``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``elicitor`` attribute references a valid user model who is the elicitor of
the form.


``enterer``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``enterer`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
enter the form.  This value is generated automatically by the system upon form
creation.


``files``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A form may be associated to zero or more files via the ``files`` attribute which
references a collection of file models.  Files are OLD objects that represent a
binary file (e.g., an audio, video or image file) along with metadata (e.g., a
description or the size of the file).  See the :ref:`file-data-structure`
section for details on the structure of file models.  To associate a form to
files upon form create/update requests, pass an array of valid file ids as the
value of the ``files`` attribute of the input object.  When a form is output by
an OLD application, the value of the ``files`` attribute of the output object
will be an array containing JSON object representations of any associated file
models.


``translations``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A form model must have at least one translation but may have more.  The
translations of a form are each translation model objects that are listed in the
``translations`` attribute of the form.  (In the relational database schema, the
``form`` and ``translation`` tables are in a one-to-many relationship.)  Forms
with multiple translations, e.g., sentences with multiple valid translations,
should use separate translation models for each such translation.  Translation
models can also have grammaticalities (cf. the ``grammaticality`` attribute) --
this feature may be used to indicate a translation that is not appropriate to a
grammatical form.  Thus, as a simplistic example, "chien" may be translationed
as "dog" and "\*wolf" using two translation models.


``grammaticality``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``grammaticality`` attribute stores the grammaticality value assigned to the
form.  This is a forced-choice attribute whose options are defined by the users
of the system in the ``grammaticalities`` attribute of the active application
settings resource.  Usually, the available grammaticalities will be a list such
as "\*", "?", "#", "\*\*", etc.


``memorizers``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``memorizers`` attribute holds a collection of zero or more user models
corresponding to the users who have memorized, or remembered, this form.  See
the section on the remembered forms resource (:ref:`remembered-forms-interface`)
for details on how memorize a form.


``morphemeBreak``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``morphemeBreak`` attribute holds a representation of the morphological
analysis of a linguistic form, i.e., a morphemic segmentation.  Maximum length
is 255 characters.  The system will expect words to be split by whitespace and
morphemes by the delimiters specified in the ``morphemeDelimiters`` attribute of
the active application settings.  By specifying appropriate values for the
``morphemeBreakValidation``, ``morphemeBreakIsOrthographic`` and
``phonemicInventory`` or ``storageOrthography`` attributes of the active
application settings resource, it is possible to ensure that data input to this
attribute are validated against the specified orthography/inventory and
delimiters.


``morphemeBreakIDs``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``morphemeBreakIDs`` attribute is a system-generated JSON array
that contains references to all matches found for each morpheme listed in the
``morphemeBreak`` attribute.  See the :ref:`morphological-processing` section
for details on the structure of this value and its method of generation.


``morphemeGloss``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``morphemeGloss`` attribute holds a string of morpheme glosses corresponding
to the phonemic representations stored in the ``morphemeBreak`` field.  Maximum
length is 255 characters. As with the ``morphemeBreak`` field, the gloss "words"
in this field should be delimited using whitespace and the glosses within words
should be delimited using the specified morpheme delimiters.


``morphemeGlossIDs``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``morphemeGlossIDs`` attribute is a system-generated JSON array
that contains references to all matches found for each morpheme gloss listed in
the ``morphemeGloss`` attribute.  See the :ref:`morphological-processing`
section for details on the structure of this value and its method of generation.


``narrowPhoneticTranscription``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``narrowhoneticTranscription`` attribute holds a narrow phonetic
transcription of the linguistic form.  Maximum length is 255 characters.  By
specifying a value for the ``narrowPhoneticInventory`` attribute of the active
application settings and setting that same resource's
``narrowPhoneticValidation`` attribute to "Error", it is possible to configure
``narrowhoneticTranscription`` validation so that values not generable using the
specified inventory are rejected.  See :ref:`object-language-validation`.


``phoneticTranscription``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``phoneticTranscription`` attribute holds a phonetic transcription of the
linguistic form.  By convention, this is a *broad* phonetic transcription.
Maximum length is 255 characters.  By specifying a value for the
``broadPhoneticInventory`` attribute of the active application settings and
setting that same resource's ``broadPhoneticValidation`` attribute to "Error",
it is possible to configure ``phoneticTranscription`` validation so that values
not generable using the specified inventory are rejected.  See
:ref:`object-language-validation`.


``semantics``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``semantics`` attribute is canonically a semantic
representation of the form, e.g., a denotation.  Maximum length is 1023
characters.  At some future point candidate values for this attribute may be
auto-generated.


``source``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``source`` attribute references a valid source model that indicates the
textual (or other) source of the form.  This is useful for when data are taken
from papers or dictionaries and need to be attributed.  The source model is
based on the BibTeX format. See the :ref:`source-data-structure` section for
details.


``speaker``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``speaker`` attribute references a valid speaker model who is the speaker or
consultant of the form.


``speakerComments``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``speakerComments`` attribute holds comments made about the form by the
speaker or consultant.


``status``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``status`` attribute encodes the status of the form with respect to its
verification.  At present, the two licit values are "tested" and "requires
testing".  Usage of this attribute permits researchers to enter forms not yet
tested in order to prepare for a planned elicitation session.


``syntacticCategory``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``syntacticCategory`` attribute references a valid syntactic category model
that categorizes the form.  For example, a form like "chien" might have a
``syntacticCategory`` value which references a syntactic category model whose
``name`` attribute is "N".  See the :ref:`syntactic-category-data-structure`
section for details.


``syntacticCategoryString``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``syntacticCategoryString`` attribute holds a system-generated value which
is a string of syntactic category names corresponding to the morphemes specified
by the creator/updater of the form.  That is, the system inspects the values of
the ``morhemeBreak`` and ``morphemeGloss`` fields and searches the database for
matches to the specified morpheme/gloss pairs; the names of the syntactic
categories of the matches are used to generate the value for the
``syntacticCategoryString`` attribute.  By searching forms based on patterns in
this field it is possible to filter the database according to higher-level
morphological or syntactic patterns.  See the :ref:`morphological-processing`
section for further details on how this value is generated.


``syntax``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``syntax`` attribute is canonically a syntactic representation
of the form, e.g., a phrase structure tree in bracket notation.  Maximum length
is 1023 characters.  At some future point candidate values for this attribute
may be auto-generated.


``tags``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A form may be associated to zero or more tags.  Tags are user-defined models
that can be used to arbitrarily categorize other OLD models.  An example usage
would be to define a tag model with a ``name`` value of "VP ellipsis" and use
that tag to categorize forms that exhibit the phenomenon.  If a form is to be
restricted, then the special "restricted" tag should be associated to it;
similarly, if the form documents a foreign word, then it should be associated to
the special "foreign word" tag.  See the :ref:`tag-data-structure` section for
more details on the tag model.


``transcription``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``transcription`` attribute holds transcriptions of linguistic forms.  By
convention, these are expected to be written in an orthography of the object
language.  Maximum length is 255 characters.  Every form must have a
transcription.  It is possible to specify a storage orthography in the active
application settings resource and configure form transcription validation so
that values not generable using the orthography are rejected.  See
:ref:`object-language-validation` for details.


``UUID``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``UUID`` attribute is a universally unique identifier (UUID),
i.e., a number represented by 32 hexadecimal digits displayed in five groups
using four hyphens.  A valid UUID is a 36-character string that looks like
``aba3ea8d-b56f-4934-a8f7-68cba500f411``.  The forms controller randomly
generates a UUID value for each newly created form model.  These values are used
to associate form backups to the forms they backup.


``verifier``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``verifier`` attribute references a valid user model who has verified the
form.  This is useful, for example, in a case where one researcher finds that a
form they have elicited has already been stored in the database and they do not
want to record a duplicate entry.  Oftentimes, however, it is desirable to enter
a duplicate entry.


.. _form-backup-data-structure:

``FormBackup``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A form backup model is created whenever a form model is updated or deleted.
These models cannot be created directly, i.e., ``POST /formbackups`` is not a
valid request.  The form backup model receives all of the attributes of the
model that it backs up.  It also has some additional attributes, viz.
``form_id`` and ``backuper``.  The value of the ``form_id`` attribute is the
value of the ``id`` attribute of the form that was backed up to create the
present form backup model.  The value of the ``backuper`` attribute is a JSON
object representing the user who created the backup (by deleting or updating the
form).  In general, the values of the relational attributes of the form (i.e.,
the attributes that refer to other models) are converted to JSON object
representations in the form backup model.  For example, the value of the
``speaker`` attribute is such a JSON object and the value of the ``files``
attribute is a JSON array of such objects representing file models.  If the form
has just been deleted, then the value of the ``datetimeModified`` value of the
form backup will be the UTC datetime at which the backup occurred.

Form backup representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "backuper": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "breakGlossCategory": "",
        "comments": "",
        "dateElicited": "",
        "datetimeEntered": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "elicitationMethod": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "elicitor": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "enterer": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "files": [], // an array of objects representing file models or []
        "form_id": 1,
        "translations": [], // an array of objects representing translation models or []
        "grammaticality": "",
        "id": 1,
        "morphemeBreak": "",
        "morphemeBreakIDs": null, // an array or null
        "morphemeGloss": "",
        "morphemeGlossIDs": null, // an array or null
        "narrowPhoneticTranscription": "",
        "phoneticTranscription": "",
        "source": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "speaker": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "speakerComments": "",
        "syntacticCategory": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
        "syntacticCategoryString": ""
        "tags": [], // an array of objects representing tag models or []
        "transcription": "",
        "UUID": "",
        "verifier": null, // an object representation of an elicitation method or null
    }


.. _form-search-data-structure:

``FormSearch``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The form search model stores searches on form resources so that these searches
can be saved for later use and shared with other users of the system.

Requests to create or update application settings resources must contain a
JSON object of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "description": u"",
        "name": u"returns all transitive verbs", // obligatory string
        "search": {...}, // an object representing an OLD form query
    }

Form search representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "id": 1,
        "name": "returns all transitive verbs",
        "search": { ... }, // an object representing an OLD form query
        "searcher": { ... } // object representation of a user model
    }


``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute is a user-supplied string that
describes the search resource.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``name`` attribute is a user-supplied string used to identify
the search resource.  Names are obligatory, may not exceed 255 characters and no
two searches may have the same name.


``search``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``search`` attribute is the JSON object representing the
search.  If the user-supplied search object is not well-formed, the system will
prevent the form search resource from being created or updated.  The search
object is an object with an obligatory ``filter`` attribute and an optional
``orderBy`` attribute (see below).  The values of both of these attributes are
arrays.  The definitions of what constitutes well-formed "filter" and "orderBy"
arrays are provided in the :ref:`search-old` section.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "filter": [ ... ],
        "orderBy": [ ... ]
    }


``searcher``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``searcher`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
create the form search.  This value is generated automatically by the system
upon form search creation.


.. _translation-data-structure:

``Translation``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Translations are translations of forms into the metalanguage.  A form model can
have multiple translations and each of these translations is a translation
model.  Each translation model has ``transcription`` and ``grammaticality``
attributes.  In relational database terminology, the form and translation tables
are in a one-to-many relationship; that is, a form may have many translations
but each translation has one and only one form.  When a form is deleted, so too
are its translations.

Translations are created not directly (i.e., there is no "translations"
resource) but upon form create and update requests.  The input JSON object of
such requests has a ``translations`` attribute whose value is an array of
objects with ``transcription`` and ``grammaticality`` attributes, e.g.,

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "translations": [
            {"transcription": "dog", "grammaticality": ""},
            {"transcription": "wolf", "grammaticality": "*"}
        ]
    }



.. _language-data-structure:

``Language``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each language model represents a language in the `ISO 639-3`_ standard.  These
models are created in the database when ``paster setup-app`` is run during the
initial set up of the application.  The data are taken from the tab-delimited
text file ``public/iso_639_3_languages_data/iso_639_3.tab``.  Existing language
models cannot be updated and new ones cannot be created.  The purpose of this
resource is to provide options for the metalanguage and object language id and
name attributes of application settings resources.

The language models are unique among OLD models in lacking an ``id`` attribute.
Instead they have ``Id`` attributes whose values are the unique three-character
strings used to identify the language.  The other attribute of note is the
``Ref_Name`` attribute whose value is the reference name of the language.  The
standard makes it clear that no special importance should be given to the
reference name; OLD administrators are encouraged to use whatever language names
seem most appropriate, despite what the value of ``Ref_Name`` may be.
However, care should be taken to attempt to identify the correct ``Id`` value
for the language being documented via an OLD web service so that this
information is unambiguous.

For completeness, the attributes of language models are listed here: ``Id``,
``Part2B``, ``Part2T``, ``Part1``, ``Scope``, ``Type``, ``Ref_Name``,
``Comment``, ``datetimeModified``.  See
http://www-01.sil.org/iso639-3/download.asp for the semantics of these
attributes.


.. _orthography-data-structure:

``Orthography``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An orthography model is a representation of the graphemes used in a particular
writing system.  The OLD makes use of orthography models in order to effect
input validation on the ``transcription`` and ``morphemeBreak`` attributes of
form models.  Previous versions of the OLD implemented orthography conversion
functionality server-side, thus allowing users to enter transcriptions in one
orthography and have it converted to a string in another (storage) orthography.
However, this functionality will now be the responsibility of any user-facing
applications that make use of OLD web services.

Requests to create or update orthography resources must contain a JSON object of
the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "initialGlottalStops": true
        "lowercase": false,
        "name": "Standard Orthography",
        "orthography": "p, t, k, n, s, i, o, a",
    }

Orthography representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "id": 1,
        "initialGlottalStops": true,
        "lowercase": false,
        "name": "",
        "orthography": ""
    }

``initialGlottalStops``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``initialGlottalStops`` is a boolean with ``True`` as the
default.  The user-supplied input may be a truthy string (i.e., "true", "on",
"yes" or "1"), JSON ``true``, a falsey string (i.e., "false", "off", "no" or
"0") or JSON ``false``.  This attribute encodes whether the orthography marks
glottal stops at the beginning of words and can be useful for orthography
conversion algorithms.


``lowercase``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``lowercase`` is a boolean with ``False`` as the default. The
user-supplied input may be a truthy string (i.e., "true", "on", "yes" or "1"),
JSON ``true``, a falsey string (i.e., "false", "off", "no" or "0") or JSON
``false``.  This attribute encodes whether the orthography uses only lowercase
characters and can be useful for orthography conversion algorithms and for
reducing the number of graphemes that must be specified in the ``orthography``
attribute.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``name`` attribute holds a name for the orthography.  The name must be
unique among orthography names and may not exceed 255 characters.  The name
should facilitate identification of the orthography.


``orthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``orthography`` attribute is a comma-delimited list of strings
representing the graphemes of the orthography.  A non-empty value for this
attribute is required.

Previous versions of the OLD drew significance from the ordering of the
graphemes (i.e., for sorting & alphabetization) and also encouraged bracketing
of graphemes into equivalence classes for the purpose of sorting (i.e., "a" and
"á" would be sorted equivalently if the orthography contained
"..., \[a, á\], ...").  The OLD web service now leaves orthography conversion to
the user-facing applications; therefore, additional conventions for orthography
specification (such as the significance of ordering and equivalence bracketing)
should be detailed in the documentation of those applications.

As described in the :ref:`object-language-validation` and
:ref:`application-settings-data-structure` sections, orthography models and, in
particular, the values of their ``orthography`` attributes are used in input
transcription validation.


.. _page-data-structure:

``Page``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A page model can be used to allow users to create web pages using a specified
markup language.  Some of the attributes (e.g., ``heading`` or ``name``) may be
removed or renamed in future versions of the OLD.

Requests to create or update page resources must contain a JSON object of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "content": u"",
        "heading": u"",
        "markupLanguage": u"",
        "name": u""
    }

Page representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "content": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "heading": "",
        "html": "",
        "id": 1,
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "name": ""
    }


``content``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``content`` attribute holds a string representing the content of the page
written in the specified markup language.


``heading``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``heading`` attribute is a user-supplied string, no longer than
255 characters, which could be used as a heading or title for the page.


``html``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``html`` attribute is the HTML generated from the user-supplied
``content`` value using the markup-to-HTML function corresponding to the
specified markup language.


``markupLanguage``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``markupLanguage`` attribute is one of "Markdown" or
"reStructuredText" as defined in the ``markupLanguages`` variable of
``lib/utils.py``.  `Markdown`_ and `reStructuredText`_ are *lightweight markup
languages*.  A lightweight markup language is a markup language (i.e., a system
for annotating a document) that is designed to be easy to read in its raw form.
The system will expect the value of the ``content`` attribute to contain markup
in the specified markup language and will choose a markup-to-HTML function
corresponding to that markup language when generating the HTML of the page.  If
no value is specified, "reStructuredText" will be the default.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``name`` attribute is a string used to identify the page.  This
value may not exceed 255 characters and a non-empty value must be provided.


.. _phonology-data-structure:

``Phonology``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OLD phonology models are representations of a phonology for the object language.
That is, they specify the relationship between underlying representations (e.g.,
the value of the ``morphemeBreak`` attribute) and surface representations (e.g.,
the value of the ``transcription``, ``phoneticTranscription`` or
``narrowPhoneticTranscription`` attributes) of form models.

The intention is to use the user-specified phonologies to compile finite-state
transducer implementations of the phonologies and to use these transducers in
the construction of morphological parsers and in functionality that compares
surface strings and underlying strings and informs users of incompatibilities.
At present this functionality is not yet implemented in the OLD.

Requests to create or update phonology resources must contain a JSON object of
the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "description": "",
        "name": "",
        "script": ""
    }

Phonology representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeEntered": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "enterer": { ... }, // object representation of a user
        "id": 1,
        "modifier": null, // object representation of a user or null
        "name": "",
        "script": "",
    }


``datetimeEntered``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``datetimeEntered`` attribute is a UTC timestamp generated by
the system when a phonology is created.  Note that this value is distinct from
the ``datetimeModified`` attribute that is common to all model types since that
value is generated upon creation *and* update requests while the
``datetimeEntered`` value is only generated upon creation requests and is not
altered thereafter.


``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute is an open-ended, user-supplied
description of the phonology.


``enterer``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``enterer`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
create the phonology.  This value is generated automatically by the system upon
phonology creation.


``modifier``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``modifier`` attribute references the user model whose account was used to
perform the most recent update on the phonology.  This value is generated
automatically by the system upon successfuly phonology update requests.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the obligatory ``name`` attribute is a unique string, not to exceed
255 characters, that identifies the phonology.


``script``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``script`` attribute holds a user-supplied string constituting the rules or
specification of the phonology.  The intention is for the OLD to make use of the
FST compiler package called `Foma <http://code.google.com/p/foma/>`_.  When this
is implemented, the OLD will expect the ``script`` value to contain a valid Foma
script and will attempt to compile it, returning an error on create/update
requests if the compile attempt fails.


.. _source-data-structure:

``Source``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources are references to texts that can be cited in the ``source`` attribute of
form and collection models.  The source schema is that of the
`BibTeX <http://www.bibtex.org/Format/>`_ file format.  The OLD validates input
to source create and update requests in adherence to the BibTeX format.
That is, a source of a given type (i.e., a BibTeX entry type) must have values
for all of the required attributes of that type.  For example, a source with a
``type`` value of "article" must have values for its ``author``, ``title``,
``journal`` and ``year`` attributes.

OLD source models have attributes corresponding to all of the standard BibTeX
field names as well as attributes corresponding to some non-standard ones.  The
full list of source attributes is given below.  In general, the source attribute
names match their BibTeX field name counterparts exactly.  The exceptions to
this are the ``key``, ``keyField``, ``type`` and ``typeField`` attributes which
correspond to BibTex key, "key" field name, entry type and "type" field name,
respectively.  See the relevant subsections below for details.

Like all other OLD models, sources have ``id`` and ``datetimeModified``
attributes.  Source models also have a ``file`` attribute for referencing an OLD
file model.

At some point, the OLD may specify a syntax for citing source models within the
value of the ``contents`` attribute of collection models.

Requests to create or update source resources must contain a JSON object of
the following form.  Source representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects
of the same form, with the addition of ``id``, ``datetimeModified`` and
``crossrefSource``  attributes.  The value of the ``crossrefSource`` attribute
is either ``null`` (if no ``crossref`` value was supplied by the user) or a JSON
object representing the cross-referenced source.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "abstract": "",
        "address": "",
        "affiliation": "",
        "annote": "",
        "author": "",
        "booktitle": "",
        "chapter": "",
        "contents": "",
        "copyright": "",
        "crossref": "",
        "edition": "",
        "editor": "",
        "file": null, // valid file model id or null on input; object on output
        "howpublished": "",
        "institution": "",
        "ISBN": "",
        "ISSN": "",
        "journal": "",
        "key": "chomsky67",
        "keyField": "",
        "keywords": "",
        "language": "",
        "location": "",
        "LCCN": "",
        "month": "",
        "mrnumber": "",
        "note": "",
        "number": "",
        "organization": "",
        "pages": "",
        "price": "",
        "publisher": "",
        "school": "",
        "series": "",
        "size": "",
        "title": "",
        "type": "book",
        "typeField": "",
        "url": "",
        "volume": "",
        "year": ""
    }

The descriptions of the BibTeX field names given in the subsections below are
taken, with some modifications, from [Kopka.2004]_.  The restrictions on lengths
of attribute values are imposed (somewhat arbitrarily) by the OLD and are not
part of the BibTeX format.


``abstract``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An abstract of the work.  Maximum length is 1000 characters.


``address``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Usually the address of the publisher or other type of institution. For major
publishing houses, it is recommended that this information be omitted entirely.
For small publishers, on the other hand, you can help the reader by giving the
complete address.  Maximum length is 1000 characters.


``affiliation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The author's affiliation.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``annote``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An annotation. It is not used by the standard bibliography styles, but may be
used by others that produce an annotated bibliography.  


``author``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The name(s) of the author(s), in the format described in [Kopka.2004]_.  There are
two basic formats: (1) *Given Names Surname* and (2) *Surname, Given Names*.
For multiple authors, use the formats just specified and separated each such
formatted name by the word "and".  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``booktitle``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Title of a book, part of which is being cited. See [Kopka.2004]_ for details on
how to type titles.  For book entries, use the title field instead.  Maximum
length is 255 characters.


``chapter``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A chapter (or section or whatever) number.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``contents``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A table of contents.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``copyright``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Copyright information.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``crossref``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``key`` value of another source to be cross-referenced. Any attribute values
that are missing from the source model are inherited from the source
cross-referenced via the ``crossref`` attribute.  Maximum length is 1000
characters.

If a valid ``key`` value is supplied as the value of the ``crossref`` attribute,
the system will use the attributes of the cross-referenced source when
validating the input.  That is, a source whose ``type`` value is, for example,
"inproceedings" would normally fail validation if it lacks a value for its
``booktitle`` attribute; however, if it cross-references another source whose
``type`` value is "proceedings" and which has a content-ful ``booktitle`` value,
then it will pass validaton.  If a valid ``crossref`` value is passed on input,
then, on output, the value of ``crossrefSource`` will be an object representing
the cross-referenced source.


``crossrefSource``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``crossrefSource`` attribute is either ``null`` or the source
model that is cross-referenced via the ``crossref`` attribute.  That is, a valid
``crossref`` value passed on input will cause the system to set the
cross-referenced source as the value of the ``crossrefSource`` attribute.  When
returning a JSON representation of the original source, the value of the
``crossrefSource`` attribute will be a JSON object representing the
cross-referenced source.


``edition``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The edition of a book -- for example, "Second". This should be an ordinal, and
should have the first letter capitalized, as shown here; the standard styles
convert to lower case when necessary.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``editor``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Name(s) of editor(s), typed as indicated in [Kopka.2004]_.  At its most basic,
this means either as *Given Names Surname* or *Surname, Given Names* and using
"and" to separate multiple editor names.  If there is also a value for the
``author`` attribute, then the ``editor`` attribute gives the editor of the book
or collection in which the reference appears.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``file``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Source models may reference an OLD file model object via the ``file`` attribute,
thus permitting the association to a source of a document containing the source
text itself.  Note that the ``file`` attribute does not correspond to a standard
BibTeX field name.


``howpublished``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

How something strange has been published. The first word should be capitalized.
Maximum length is 255 characters.


``institution``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The sponsoring institution of a technical report.  Maximum length is 255
characters.


``ISBN``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The International Standard Book Number.  Maximum length is 20 characters.


``ISSN``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The International Standard Serial Number. Used to identify a journal.  Maximum
length is 20 characters.


``journal``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A journal name. Abbreviations are provided for many journals.  Maximum length is
255 characters.


``key``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The OLD source ``key`` field is the BibTeX key, i.e., the unique string used to
unambiguously identify a source.  Usually some type of convention is established
for creating ``key`` values, e.g., the first author's last name in lowercase
followed by the year of publication: "chomsky57".  Maximum length is 1000
characters.  All sources must have a valid ``key`` value and this value must be
unique among source ``key`` values.  A valid ``key`` value is any combination of
ASCII letters, numerals and symbols (except the comma).


``keyField``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Used for alphabetizing, cross referencing, and creating a label when the
``author`` information is missing. This field should not be confused with the
source's ``key`` attribute.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``keywords``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Key words used for searching or possibly for annotation.  Maximum length is 255
characters.


``language``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The language the document is in.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``location``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A location associated with the entry, such as the city in which a conference
took place.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``LCCN``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Library of Congress Call Number.  Maximum length is 20 characters.


``month``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The month in which the work was published or, for an unpublished work, in which
it was written.  Maximum length is 100 characters.


``mrnumber``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Mathematical Reviews number.  Maximum length is 25 characters.


``note``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any additional information that can help the reader.  The first word should be
capitalized.  Maximum length is 1000 characters.


``number``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The number of a journal, magazine, technical report, or of a work in a series.
An issue of a journal or magazine is usually identified by its volume and
number; the organization that issues a technical report usually gives it a
number; and sometimes books are given numbers in a named series.  Maximum length
is 100 characters.


``organization``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The organization that sponsors a conference or that publishes a manual.  Maximum
length is 255 characters.


``pages``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One or more page numbers or range of numbers, such as 42--111 or 7,41,73--97 or
43+ (the "+" in this last example indicates pages following that don't form a
simple range).  Maximum length is 100 characters.


``price``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The price of the document.  Maximum length is 100 characters.


``publisher``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The publisher's name.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``school``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The name of the school where a thesis was written.  Maximum length is 255
characters.


``series``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The name of a series or set of books. When citing an entire book, the ``title``
attribute gives its title and an optional ``series`` attribute gives the name of
a series or multi-volume set in which the book is published.  Maximum length is
255 characters.


``size``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The physical dimensions of a work.  Maximum length is 255 characters.


``title``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The work's title, typed as explained in the [Kopka.2004]_.  Maximum length is 255
characters.


``type``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the OLD source ``type`` attribute is the BibTeX entry type, e.g.,
"article", "book", etc.  The valid entry types and their required fields are
specified as the keys of the ``entryTypes`` dictionary in ``lib/bibtex.py``.  A
valid ``type`` value is obligatory for all source models.  The chosen ``type``
value will determine which other attributes must also possess non-empty values,
cf. the table below.

+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| type          | required attributes                                        |
+===============+============================================================+
| article       | author, title, journal, year                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| book          | author or editor, title, publisher, year                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| booklet       | title                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| conference    | author, title, booktitle, year                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| inbook        | author or editor, title, chapter or pages, publisher, year |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| incollection  | author, title, booktitle, publisher, year                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| inproceedings | author, title, booktitle, year                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| manual        | title                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| mastersthesis | author, title, school, year                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| misc          |                                                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| phdthesis     | author, title, school, year                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| proceedings   | title, year                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| techreport    | author, title, institution, year                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| unpublished   | author, title, note                                        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+


``typeField``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The type of a technical report---for example, "Research Note".  Maximum length
is 255 characters.


``url``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The universal resource locator for online documents; this is not standard but
supplied by more modern bibliography styles.  Maximum length is 1000 characters.


``volume``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The volume of a journal or multi-volume book.  Maximum length is 100 characters.


``year``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The year of publication or, for an unpublished work, the year it was written.
Generally it should consist of four numerals, such as 1984.


.. _speaker-data-structure:

``Speaker``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An OLD speaker model represents a speaker or consultant who is the source of a
linguistic form or collection thereof or who is the speaker on a recording.

Requests to create or update speaker resources must contain a JSON object of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "dialect": "",
        "firstName": "John",
        "lastName": "Doe",
        "markupLanguage": ""
        "pageContent": ""
    }

Speaker representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following
form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "dialect": "",
        "firstName": "",
        "html": "",
        "id": 1,
        "lastName": "",
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "pageContent": ""
    }


``dialect``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``dialect`` attribute is a string denoting the dialect of the
speaker.  The value may not exceed 255 characters.

Note that for abstract lexical forms, where it does not make sense to specify a
speaker, dialects can be specified via tags -- perhaps with a special syntax to
facilitate search, e.g., "dialect:dialect_name".


``firstName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``firstName`` attribute holds the first name of the speaker.  A value is
obligatory and cannot exceed 255 characters.


``html``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``html`` attribute is a string of HTML that is generated by the
system using the value of the ``pageContent`` attribute and the markup language
specified in the ``markupLanguage`` attribute.


``lastName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``lastName`` attribute holds the last name of the speaker.  A value is
obligatory and cannot exceed 255 characters.


``markupLanguage``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``markupLanguage`` attribute is one of "Markdown" or
"reStructuredText" as defined in the ``markupLanguages`` variable of
``lib/utils.py``.  `Markdown`_ and `reStructuredText`_ are *lightweight markup
languages*.  A lightweight markup language is a markup language (i.e., a system
for annotating a document) that is designed to be easy to read in its raw form.
This value determines which markup-to-HTML function is employed when the system
attempts to generate the ``html`` value from the user-supplied ``pageContent``
value.  If no value is specified, "reStructuredText" will be the default.


``pageContent``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``pageContent`` attribute is a string that can be used to
construct a web page for the speaker.  Future versions of the OLD will probably
include ``markupLanguage`` and ``html`` attributes so that speaker creators can
specify a markup language that the system can use to generate and cache the
HTML.



.. _syntactic-category-data-structure:

``SyntacticCategory``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Syntactic category models are used to categorize form models into morphological
or syntactic classes.

Requests to create or update syntactic category resources must contain a JSON
object of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "description": "",
        "name": "",
        "type": ""
    }

Syntactic category representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "id": "",
        "name": "",
        "type": ""
    }

``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute can be used to describe the category
and/or clarify its intended usage.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``name`` attribute holds the name of the category.  Example names might be
"N", "S", "Agr", "VP", "V'", "Noun", "Sentence", "CP", etc.  A non-empty value
for this attribute is obligatory, must be unique among other syntactic category
``name`` values and may not exceed 255 characters.


``type``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntactic categories are themselves categorized via the ``type`` attribute.
Valid values, as defined in the ``syntacticCategoryTypes`` tuple of
``lib/utils.py`` are "lexical", "phrasal" and "sentential".  An input  value of
``null`` or the empty string will result in ``null`` as value.  The purpose of
this attribute is to help the system to better understand the categorization.
This categorization could be useful for functionality that, say, seeks to induce
a grammar of the morphology of the language.  The available syntactic category
types may change in future versions of the OLD.


.. _tag-data-structure:

``Tag``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tags are general-purpose, user-defined models that can be associated to forms,
files and collections.  Any form, file or collection may have zero or more tags
associated to it.  Example usage of a tag would be to create tags for linguistic
phenomena relevant to ones research; searches could then make reference to the
presence or absence of this tag.

There are two special tags that are identified by their ``name`` values; these
are the "restricted" and "foreign word" tags.  These tags cannot be deleted via
the interface (and should not be forcefully deleted by administrators using the
RDBMS as this may have unintended consequences).  The usage of the restricted
and foreign word tags are described in the :ref:`auth` and
:ref:`object-language-validation` sections, respectively.

Requests to create or update tag resources must contain a JSON object of the
following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "description": "",
        "name": ""
    }

Tag representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following form.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "description": "",
        "id": "",
        "name": ""
    }

``description``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``description`` attribute can be used to describe the tag
and/or clarify its intended usage.


``name``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``name`` attribute holds the name of the tag.  Example names might be "VP
ellipsis", "double object" or "needs verification".  A non-empty value for this
attribute is obligatory, must be unique among other tag ``name`` values and may
not exceed 255 characters.


.. _user-data-structure:

``User``
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

User models represent the authorized users of an OLD web service.
Authenticating to an OLD web service means supplying values for ``username`` and
``password`` attributes that match those of an existing user model.  Only users
with a ``role`` value of "administrator" are authorized to create new users.
An authenticated user is permitted to update her own user model; however, only
administrators can change the value of the ``username`` attribute.

Requests to create or update user resources must contain a JSON object of the
following form.  Note that on update, setting the values of the ``username`` and
``password`` attributes to ``null`` will cause the system to leave those values
unchanged.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "affiliation": "",
        "email": "",
        "firstName": "",
        "inputOrthography": null,
        "lastName": "",
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "outputOrthography": null
        "pageContent": "",
        "password": "",
        "password_confirm": "",
        "role": "",
        "username": "",
    }

User representations returned by the OLD are JSON objects of the following form.
Note that the ``password`` attribute is never present and that the ``username``
attribute is present only in the return value of DELETE, POST and PUT requests.

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "affiliation": "",
        "datetimeModified": "",
        "email": "",
        "firstName": "",
        "html": "",
        "id": 1,
        "inputOrthography": null, // object representation of an orthography model or null
        "lastName": "",
        "markupLanguage": "",
        "outputOrthography": null, // object representation of an orthography model or null
        "pageContent": "",
        "role": "",
        "username": ""
    }


``affiliation``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``affiliation`` attribute is a string representing the school
or institution with which the user is affiliated.  A value here is optional.
Maximum allowable length is 255 characters.


``email``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``email`` attribute holds the email address of the user.  A valid email must
be provided.  Maximum allowable length is 255 characters.


``firstName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``firstName`` attribute is the first name(s) of the user.  A
value here is obligatory.  Maximum allowable length is 255 characters.


``html``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``html`` attribute is a string of HTML that is generated by the
system using the value of the ``pageContent`` attribute and the markup language
specified in the ``markupLanguage`` attribute.


``inputOrthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``inputOrthography`` is a reference to an existing orthography model object.
The purpose of a user-specific input orthography is to allow for the possibility
that users will enter form transcriptions (and possibly also morpheme
segmentations) using one orthography (i.e., their input orthography) but that
these transcriptions will be translated into another orthography (i.e., the
system-wide storage orthography) for storage in the database.  When outputing
the forms, the system would then re-translate them from the storage orthography
into the user's output orthography.  Previous OLD applications implemented this
user-specific orthography conversion server-side.  However, with the new
architecture of the OLD >= 1.0 this added complication seems best implemented
client-side.


``lastName``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``lastName`` attribute is the last name of the user.  A value
here is obligatory.  Maximum allowable length is 255 characters.


``markupLanguage``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``markupLanguage`` attribute is one of "Markdown" or
"reStructuredText" as defined in the ``markupLanguages`` variable of
``lib/utils.py``.  `Markdown`_ and `reStructuredText`_ are *lightweight markup
languages*.  A lightweight markup language is a markup language (i.e., a system
for annotating a document) that is designed to be easy to read in its raw form.
This value determines which markup-to-HTML function is employed when the system
attempts to generate the ``html`` value from the user-supplied ``pageContent``
value.  If no value is specified, "reStructuredText" will be the default.


``outputOrthography``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``outputOrthography`` is a reference to an existing orthography model
object.  The purpose of a user-specific input orthography is to allow for the
possibility that users will enter form transcriptions (and possibly also
morpheme segmentations) using one orthography (i.e., their input orthography)
but that these transcriptions will be translated into another orthography (i.e.,
the system-wide storage orthography) for storage in the database.  When
outputing the forms, the system would then re-translate them from the storage
orthography into the user's output orthography.  Previous OLD applications
implemented this user-specific orthography conversion server-side.  However,
with the new architecture of the OLD >= 1.0 this added complication seems best
implemented client-side.


``pageContent``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``pageContent`` attribute holds a string representing the content of the
user's page.  This content should be written using the markup language specified
in the ``markupLanguage`` attribute.


``password``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When creating a user, a valid value for the ``password`` attribute must be
supplied.  A valid password is composed of at least eight characters but no more
than 255.  It must contain either at least one printable character not in the
printable ASCII range or one symbol, one digit, one uppercase letter and one
lowercase letter.  For example, "dave.Smith1" is a valid password, as is
"philippe.gagné".  (The latter contains a non-ASCII character.)

The users controller stores the password in the database encrypted using the
``PassLib`` module's implementation of the PBKDF2 key derivation function and
the value of the ``salt`` attribute.  During authentication attempts, the system
applies the same encryption to the supplied password values and authentication
succeeds if the encrypted password string from the request matches the encrypted
password of the specified user.  This means that even administrators of the
system are unable to view any user passwords in their unencrypted form.

When specifying a new password, the input object passed in the request must also
contain a ``password_confirm`` attribute whose value exactly matches that of the
object's ``password`` attribute.


``rememberedForms``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``rememberedForms`` attribute is a collection of form models
that the user has "remembered".  See the :ref:`remembered-forms-interface`
section for details on how to modify the value of this attribute.  Note that
this attribute is not included in the JSON object representation of user models.
Retrieving a user's remembered forms requires a separate request to the
``rememberedforms`` resource.


``role``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``role`` attribute is used to classify users and is the basis for the
authorization functionality.  Every user must have a value for the ``role``
attribute.  Valid values are "administrator", "contributor" and "viewer".
Administrators have unrestricted access to all requests on all resources,
contributors have read and write access to almost all resources and viewers have
only read access.  See the :ref:`auth` section for more details on roles and
authorization.



``salt``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A value for the ``salt`` attribute is generated by the system when a user is
created.  This value is a randomly generated UUID.  The salt aids in the secure
encryption of the password.


``username``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The value of the ``username`` attribute is a string consisting of letters of the
English alphabet, numbers and the underscore.  Each user must have a unique
``username`` value and no two usernames may be the same.  Only an administrator
can update the username of a user model.







.. [#f1] The models are defined in the ``model`` directory of the source code.
   Each model has its own appropriately named module where it is declared.  The
   form model, for example, is declared in ``model/form.py``.

.. [#f4] The code that validates user input is located in ``lib/schemata.py``.

.. [#f2] Cf. http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/ and
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode_equivalence.

.. [#f3] Technically, such requests will be rejected if the length of the
   request body (as a Python unicode object) is greater than 20971520.

.. [#f6] Note that updates to a local file model/resource cannot alter the
   binary data of the file model.  That is, if the wrong file is uploaded, it is
   necessary to delete the miscreated file and to create a new one with the
   correct file data.

.. [#f5] Note the distinction between OLD *collections* which are a type of
   model and *collections* in the ORM sense where the term refers to a type of
   model attribute which references a set of zero or more other models.  E.g.,
   ``form.files`` is a collection of file models and is an example of a
   collection in the second sense.



.. [Kopka.2004] Kopka, Helmut and Daly, Patrick W. 2004. Guide to LATEX.
   Addison-Wesley Professional.



.. _reStructuredText: <http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html>

.. _Markdown: <http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/>

.. _ISO 639-3: <http://www.sil.org/iso639-3/>
